Title: Strukturelle Grammatik: Wie es anfing und was daraus wurde

Authors: Bierwisch, Manfred

Keywords: here, come, your, 4 to 6 keywords or keyphrases

Publication date: 2025-05-20

Description:

This article outlines the scientific and institutional context in which llse Zimmermann conducted her research and became a distinguished member of the linguistic community. The article is not meant to be an academic biography -- it is a `workshop visit'. The reader will be guided through the scientific development of the Structural Grammar Research Group established at the linguistic department of the German Academy of Sciences (East Berlin) at the end of the 1950s, which Ilse Zimmermann joined in the mid-1960s.


The Structural Grammar Research Group (Arbeitsstelle Strukturelle Grammatik,
ASG) was at its beginning strongly influenced by Roman Jakobson&rsquo;s structuralism,
and later adopted Chomsky&rsquo;s generative grammar. One outstanding result of the
early period was the insight that the basic position of the German verb is 
sentence-final. This raised questions about the difference between verbs and nouns, more
precisely, nominalizations, which then became the focus of Ilse Zimmermann&rsquo;s
work. A structure of lexical entities was suggested that takes into account the
&nbsp;parallels between sentences and nominalizations including semantic features referring
to basic cognitive properties while showing the asymmetry characteristics known
from structuralism.



While the ASG&rsquo;s research attracted increasing attention in the linguistic field, the
situation in the Academy became politically tight, eventually leading to the 
liquidation of the group in the beginning of the 1970s. It was re-established ten years later
under the label of cognitive linguistics, with Ilse Zimmermann back on board. The
focus of the second group was on dimensional adjectives and included syntactic,
semantic and also cognitive aspects. Open questions from the earlier period were
revisited and considered from a more general point of view.



After the fall of the Wall the group was finally transformed into a Max Planck
research group where its research agenda finally came to an end, or rather, was
taken up in various other linguistic projects, from different perspectives.


&nbsp;


Contents:
 - 453-Zimmermann-2025-12.pdf
