Title: Exploring Teachers' use of Resources for Teaching and Learning Mathematics Addition to Grade Three Learners

Authors: William Kathithe

Keywords: Resources, strategies, Mathematics addition, teaching and learning and challenges.

Publication date: 2025-05-27

Description:

Resources for teaching and learning are an essential part of the process of teaching and learning in general, and specifically in mathematics. This article examines how teaching and learning resources are used in addition to mathematics in order to comprehend teachers' perspectives towards the usage of resources in the chosen school. The purpose of this study, which focused only on primary schools, was to ascertain how teaching and learning resources were applied in the teaching of mathematics and how such applications impacted the learning results of the learners. Using a qualitative approach, the study collected data from primary school teachers via focus groups, interviews, and classroom observations. Using participatory action research, the utilization of teaching and learning resources in mathematics in primary school classes was thoroughly investigated. Teaching and learning resources have become a prevalent trend in educational contexts as a means of increasing learners' motivation and participation. The results assisted in identifying challenges such as time constraints, large class sizes, teacher knowledge and skills, concerns about the appropriate use of resources, concerns about financial constraints, and a lack of professional development opportunities and training for teachers. They also provided recommendations for improving the effective use of resources in primary school mathematics teaching. However, the study focused on how resources would facilitate group learning, promote learner involvement, and provide tailored teaching. The results of this investigation thus provided valuable information regarding the usage of instructional resources and learning materials in primary school mathematics classes, as well as any potential effects on learners' learning outcomes in addition. It is advised that all school leaders get familiar with the resources available for teaching and learning. In addition to setting up support systems for teachers and head teachers, the government is also expected to educate administrators about the programme.


Contents:
 - 2.pdf
