Title: Agricultural Science and Education: Figures, Achievements, and Prospects : The Fourth Sazanovskyi Readings

Authors: Poltava State Agrarian University

Keywords: History of sciense

Publication date: 2025-03-25

Description:

This collection contains the materials of the All-Ukrainian scientific and practical conference dedicated to the 105th anniversary of the founding of Poltava State Agrarian University and the Educational and Scientific Institute of Agrotechnologies, Selection, and Ecology. The publication includes sections on: the history of agricultural science and education, prominent figures; and current issues in crop production, agrochemistry, soil science, and agriculture.
Intended for researchers, university lecturers, students, postgraduate students, managers, and specialists of agricultural enterprises.


Збірник вміщує матеріали всеукраїнської науково-практичної конференції присвячена 105-річчю заснування Полтавського державного аграрного університету та Навчально-наукового інституту агротехнологій, селекції та екології та вміщує розділи: історія аграрної науки й освіти, видатні постаті; актуальні питання землеробства, агрохімії, ґрунтознавства та рослинництва. Призначений для наукових співробітників, викладачів, студентів й аспірантів вищих навчальних закладів, керівників і спеціалістів сільськогосподарських підприємств.


&nbsp;


CONTENTS
HISTORY OF AGRICULTURAL SCIENCE AND EDUCATION,
OUTSTANDING FACTS
Mykola OPARA: educator, researcher and organizer of science: round table on the occasion of his 85th birthday . 5
Opara N.M. In harmony with nature (memories of my father).. 11&nbsp;


To the 85th anniversary of Mykola Mykolayovych Opara . .. 13&nbsp;


Pospielov S.V., Voropina V.O., Olepir R.V., Mishchenko O.V., Gordeeva O.F. Historical and agrotechnological aspects of studying the localization of fertilizer application at Poltava State Agrarian University .......16
Apostol T.M. The role of O.G. Nabokikh in the establishment of natural and agricultural zoning on Ukrainian lands .... 29
Vergunov V.A. &ldquo;Scientific soil system&rdquo; of the American professor G. Campbell for farming in arid climate - one of the forerunners of the &ldquo;Poltava experiment&rdquo; of 1973-1988 ... 32


Samorodov V.M., Kuzmenko N.V. Researcher Georgii Zhukov (1879 - after February 1960 (?): biography over time ................... 39 Samorodov V.M., Pospielova G.D., Kovalenko N.P. Cuscuta L. in Poltava region: history of appearance and control in agrocenoses ....44&nbsp;


TOPICAL ISSUES OF AGRICULTURE, AGROCHEMISTRY, SOIL SCIENCE AND
CROP PRODUCTION
Vodianyk A.V., Pospielov S.V. Alfalfa as an element of agricultural production stabilization ... 47
Glushchenko L.D. Changes in general indicators of carbon and group composition of humus under influence of anthropogenic and natural factors ... 51&nbsp;


Danilenko E.V., Mishchenko O.V. Microfertilizers on corn under different growing schemes ........54


Doroshenko V.P., Onipko V.V. Influence of seed treatment on germination and grain yield of maize ... 57


Dudka R.O., Onipko V.V. Selection of the optimal technology of winter wheat sowing in the conditions of the Left-Bank Forest-Steppe of Ukraine .... 61
Koba R.G., Taranenko S.V. Corn yield depending on the types of basic tillage and sowing methods in conditions of unstable moisture ....64


Krasovskyi V.V., Cherniak T.V. Formation of the collection of Cydonia oblonga Mill. in Khorol Botanical Garden .................. 67
Laslo O.O. Reducing agroclimatic and soil risks: modeling of different farming practices .... 70


Malomyzhev A.S., Onipko V.V. Efficiency of soybean inoculants application in conditions of Left-Bank Forest-Steppe of Ukraine ...... 73


Mushynskyi A.A., Onipko V.V. Comparative evaluation of soil and foliar herbicides in maize crops ... 76&nbsp;


Olepir R.V., Voropin M.S., Voropin P.O. Efficiency of foliar fertilization in soybean cultivation ..... 79


Ponomarenko Y.O., Mishchenko O.V. Humates - anti-stress therapy for plants ......82&nbsp;


Totskyi V.M., Glushchenko L.D. Influence of pre-sowing fertilization and foliar feeding on sunflower productivity ....... 86


Contents:
 - poltava_sazanov_4-2025.pdf
