Title: The Study on Sustainable Tourism above mere Carbon Footprint Analysis to explore Financial Advantages of Green Hospitality

Authors: Sanika Chandrashekhar Magar

Keywords: 

Publication date: 2025-03-30

Description:

<em><span>The focus of academic research on sustainable tourism is to assess how reducing carbon emissions in the environment affects the sector. The hotel's economic analysis was the first assessment tool to set up a subsequent ecological assessment system. Hotels implementing eco-friendly methods with technical practices are given great economic benefits, while simultaneously improving global environmental health through money procurement. Stakeholder support for renewable energy projects supported by water protection measures leads to twice the cost reduction and improved guest satisfaction, resulting in positive outcomes for hotels. In Sustainable Hotel Management hotel&rsquo;s allow hotels to support both business growth and ecological maintenance goals. The hotel industry has received competitive advantages through the implementation of sustainable strategies in the context of practice. Other customers looking for eco-friendly hotel services will lead to price increases that generate better allocations through optimal resource management. Sustainable Hotels benefit from two support platforms which include sustainability certification networks and tax credits and financial sponsorship services from the state. Statistical analysis, according to case studies, shows how sustainability achieves essential economic benefits, but the main objective remains ethical responsibility in business. In the current financial situation, tourism functions through the implementation of eco-friendly hotels. The improved financial results of this company put strain on financial services received by other hotel companies. Companies need operational practices for expanded growth and sustainable principles that should be essential to financial decisions.</span></em>


Contents:
 - S0622176.pdf
